# Data-Projects
# Unveiling the Patterns: A Data-Driven Examination of Crime in the UK
# Executive Summary
Criminality is the most common social concern that affects individuals, immediate communities and the country at large. The advancement in big data analytics (BDA) has helped to curb this menace significantly to some extent by unraveling hidden trends and patterns in datasets, discovering their correlation to external factors such as socio-economic factors and pandemics. In this report, the application of some big data analytics such as SQL queries, Hive, MapReduce and Machine learning models (Linear regression, random forest regression, support vector regression, radial basis function and clustering) revealed the hidden trends such as the top 7 offence groups which has theft offences and violence against the person topping the list, the crime rate over a decade from 2012/2013 financial year to 2022/2023 which showed a progressive increase with a slight decline in 2021/2022 which can be attributed to effect of the covid pandemic. Another interesting pattern which was uncovered was the crime epicenters which is associated with the force names, and this had the Metropolitan police, West Yorkshire and Greater Manchester on top of the list. Machine Learning prediction was carried out to forecasting the rate of drug offences in the next ten years using different algorithms, but the random forest regression showed the least mean squared error, thus it represents the best model for predicting crime analysis in this report. Furthermore, the use of visualization techniques such as matplotlib and power BI was not left out and this helped to unveil and show a proper graphical representation of these findings. In conclusion, in the use of BDA for crime analysis there are some many short comings such as poor data quality, lack of data privacy, algorithmic bias, inadequate data regulations amongst others, this can be addressed by employing good data profiling tools, privacy-preserving strategies and setting up an independent regulatory committee to ensure compliance and adherence to the set polices and standards for more sophisticated advancement in the big data world. It is worth pointing out that more trends can be revealed if datetime, gender and geolocation details were included in the dataset. 
# Data Understanding 
The UK Crime dataset is made up of a structured data which contains 8 columns and about 252522 rows and spans between 2012 financial year to 2023 financial year. The column headers are financial year, financial quarter, force name, offence description, offence group, offence subgroup, offence code and number of offences. Several kinds of criminality which is grouped under offence group ranging from theft offences, sexual offences, violence against the person, criminal damage and arson, fraud offences, drug offences, miscellaneous crimes against the society, public order offences and robbery also listed in it. It has about 180 offence codes, 48 Force names and numerous offences categorized under the offence subgroup.
# Key Findings
In this UK exploratory crime data analysis, the main aim is to look into the crime data for the past 10 years (2012/2013 – 2022/2023) and gain meaningful insights about the hidden trends of crime and possibly provide some advice on policing, policy making and research enthusiasts.
Comparing the crime rates for the ten years period, there was a constant progressive increase in the crime rate with a slight decline in 2020/2021 which is believed to be as a result of the covid event that ravaged the world. The offence groups that had an all-time high values are theft offences with about 37%, violence against the person 18%, criminal damage and arson 15%. Another insight trend in the dataset is in the force name which has the Metropolitan police ranking up with 13.8%, West Yorkshire 11.6% and Greater Manchester 11.5%. This statistics will help the UK police to prioritize the resources in these areas and channel more energy in combating theft offences, violence against the person and criminal damage and arson.
Diving into the quarterly data, the second quarter was seen to top the least although there was no slight difference between each quarter which can be attributed to the poor data quality of the exclusion of the date time and timestamp column which would have allowed for more revealing of deep trends. The machine learning model implemented for predicting the number of drug offences in the next decade 2024-2034 shows the random forest regression model has the best model and has a mean offences of 123044 drug offences, this implies that drug offences will be hitting its peak in the next decade and as such the UK police should deploy more technologies to curb this growing menace.
